[Music]
[Applause]
well hello and welcome to topcast for
episode 101 for a somewhat more informal
format today and ask me anything episode
i'm presuming this one will need to be
followed up by episode 102 which will
also be an ask me anything episode
because i've received so many questions
via patreon and twitter primarily some
by email and various other places as you
can see my setup is a little different
today i've got some new podcasting
equipment so 101 is very much going to
be the episode where i'm experimenting
with this slightly different equipment
trying to learn how to be a little more
professional but without further ado
let's get on to the questions that
people have posed to me and i'll be
treating the patreons with the respect
they deserve thank you to all of my
patreons for your support over these
last few years and first among them is
amaro cabelli and thank you in
particular to amarro not only for his
patronage but also for providing some of
the excellent design work that i'll be
using over the coming few episodes and
amaro's question is i would like to hear
your take on the cultural beginning of
infinity that according to david started
during the scientific revolution i don't
think that i understand why he places
the start of open-ended knowledge
creation at that point in history rather
than earlier or later the dating seemed
easy to vary to me because i did not
understand what precisely made this
period so distinct from what came before
why anatomically modern and presumably
creative humans failed to make
significant progress for hundreds of
thousands of years indeed seems like
something in need of an explanation
however could it not be possible that
cultural beginning of infinity was
somehow much earlier than during the
enlightenment and it just took a while
for the compound interest of knowledge
creation to start making large leaps
like we see
them in the modern era after all for all
their primitive ways europeans and
chinese during the middle ages did
possess at least some significant
knowledge that isn't found in
hunter-gatherer cultures like the
building and maintaining of cities for
instance the way david talks about
static versus dynamic cultures almost
seems like he suggests that there is a
tipping point between the two akin to
the melting point of water where
cultures past this point liquid may
still get more dynamic hot in this
analogy but they are somehow
fundamentally different from static
frozen societies how can we conceive of
this tipping point how can we know where
and when it happened and how to cause it
again should we ever fall back into
staticity great question so i think that
it all comes down to this concept of a
tradition of criticism david does talk
in the beginning of infinity about the
various mini enlightenments that
happened over time the medicis in
florence for example but most notably of
course in ancient greece in athens there
was a mini enlightenment there was a
time there where people had a kind of
tradition of criticism in other words
everything was up for grabs more or less
certainly more than in the
hunter-gatherer tribes that were
mentioned there where in greek society
in
athenic society we should say people
were willing to criticize each other's
ideas and we had a flourishing of
philosophy and mathematics and so on and
so forth political institutions that was
all stamped out by the spartans
obviously during the war and that
enlightenment ended our enlightenment is
different because it so far has
persisted it has been robust and
resilient so it's certainly not easy to
vary this tradition of criticism that
began during
the scientific revolution somewhere
around the 1600s 1700s something like
that leading into the industrial
revolution is not an arbitrary point in
history yes there was gradual very
gradual
improvements in these static societies
that pre-existed the
enlightenment societies then the the
societies in the west but as david says
there is no perfect example of either a
static society which would be a society
that makes zero progress whatsoever
and a perfectly dynamic society which is
making progress as rapidly as
physically possible something like that
or better thought of as one in which
there are absolutely no anti-rational
means in that society whatsoever but
even in our dynamic society the fastest
growing most stable dynamic society that
has hitherto ever existed there are
still many anti-rational means in the
minds of individuals and culturally
pervading our society in the way in
which we are able to undergo rapid
progress over time so why did as amara
says there anatomically modern and
presumably creative humans fail to make
significant progress for hundreds of
thousands of years yes that's explained
in the beginning of infinity precisely
for the reasons that you hint at there
which is they exist in a static society
what is a static society a static
society is one which is governed largely
by the existence of anti-rational means
which tend to reduce the capacity of
people to even begin to think outside
the box so to speak to begin to question
the authorities to begin to question the
way in which things are done
traditionally they are inculcated with a
certain way of thinking and in
particular they're inculcated with the
idea that you should defer either to the
authorities or you should simply do you
should simply reenact
the way in which your society teaches
you to live year upon year generation
after generation in these societies
there is no questioning of the norms
unlike in our society where the norms
are there to be questioned we question
constantly what the norms are sometimes
indeed to our own detriment sometimes
when the light of criticism so to speak
shines a little too brightly on certain
good virtuous things in our society
causing perhaps
institutions which help preserve this
tradition of criticism to come under
fire and people wanting revolution to
overtake our society which is a danger
it's a kind of criticism of the way in
which good institutions work so
our kind of criticism so far it hasn't
caused too much damage to our
enlightenment tradition but it could
criticism can always turn itself in on
a tradition of criticism as for tipping
point
we i think it would be almost impossible
but perhaps not impossible this is a
topic for historians of optimism or
historians of the traditions of
criticism so there's certainly some
avenues here for anyone who's interested
in history to explore this particular
uh question about when the tipping point
was if indeed there was an actual
tipping point there are many that we can
talk about we can talk about galileo's
emphasis on using cementi trials
experimentation in order to
test ideas to test ideas about physical
reality so certainly that is a tipping
point is that all that you need no you
need more than that you're the royal
society saying take no one's word for it
so a rejection of purely looking at the
authorities
the tradition of criticism i think
continues to be itself improved over
time so there wouldn't be a single one
tipping point i don't think it is easily
comparable to something like a
phase change of liquid into gas or
something like that because of course
that happens at a very specific definite
point in time and a tradition of
criticism can continually be improved
and so i imagine that it is something
that is more continuous than that it
starts off slowly it begins to ramp up
and it continues to ramp up through to
today when we figure out
more interesting better ways to create
knowledge more quickly so i hope that
answers amaro's question okay after
listing back to question one for editing
purposes without really going into how
the sausage is made let me just say i
need to put a pop filter there maybe
move away from the microphone a little
bit let's try number two question two
from mart
hi brett here is my question what's the
reason children seem to be able to learn
certain things much easier than adults i
think stephen pinker once mentioned an
age limit on learning new languages
fluently in chess the general rule is
that you have to start young to become
say a grand master given explanatory
universality i guess these limits cannot
be hard limits but what explains this
pattern ps happy to be a supporter with
all the great content you put out thanks
well thank you mart of course for being
a supporter of mine i think firstly the
common understanding of what's going on
is that people's brains simply get older
and slower and filled up with facts and
so therefore they don't have as much
memory space left who knows about that
we don't know enough about the brain to
know whether or not that's a factor
but with explanatory universality what
we can say about the software running on
the brain that is the mind is that it is
possible it is absolutely certainly
possible for any person who is older to
learn and do whatever any younger person
can now why can't why don't they what is
this pattern as mart says there i think
it's two things possibly related
one is hang-ups and hang-ups is just
this idea that you gradually learn over
time these bad lessons from school from
wider culture that you can't do a
particular thing i know i have them for
example in the case exactly in the case
of languages
i feel as if i can't get a handle on you
know learning korean which is what i've
tried to do for some years now
that there's a certain level of
embarrassment that comes with being
older and trying to learn languages
hang-ups of that kind that young
children simply don't have they haven't
learned to be embarrassed by trying to
make these new funny sounding noises
coming out of their mouth but older
people do any english speaker who at the
age of 30 tries to learn mandarin
understands this feeling there's a
certain amount of embarrassment in
trying to make these sounds and not come
off sounding foolish and you think
you're sounding foolish so that's one
thing that's going on that's absolutely
one thing that's going on just hang up
so it's the bad ideas that are
preventing us from learning as quickly
as what young people do i would say
that's the main reason and it has
nothing to do about the physical
structure of the brain the fact the
brain itself anatomically is changing in
some way i'd say that's a minor issue if
we could get over the hang-ups
you'd be able to learn things as fast as
any child the other thing that's
possibly related is simply interest
people figure out what they're really
interested in and they tend to get bored
of things ahead of time because they
know i'm not going to be interested in
that thing young people don't yet know
what they're not interested in and so
everything seems interesting so they'll
try and learn absolutely anything at all
and figure out over time that's not
particularly one of my interests
i tried to do jujitsu some years ago and
i spent some months on it because a lot
of the podcasters i was listening to
were telling me about how wonderful
jiu-jitsu is how it's kind of like chess
for the body and it's really interesting
i tried maybe i didn't try hard enough
i'm sure that some prominent excellent
jiu-jitsu practitioners could
show me some insights into how to find
it interesting but i just didn't find it
interesting i wanted to find it
interesting but i couldn't and i began
to coerce myself and i realized this is
a fool's errand once you start to have
to really try to find something
interesting there's no point anymore and
so i wasn't learning at a rapid rate
because i simply wasn't interesting and
it wasn't so much that i had hang-ups
about anything it's just that i didn't
find
the insights and the interest that other
people were telling me were there to be
found possibly if i persevered longer
but then again that would have meant
coercing myself into persevering longer
when i had other interests i could have
been doing something else with my time
that i did find more interesting which
is what i ended up doing so i think
that's all it is children don't yet know
what they're not interested in so
they'll have a go at trying everything
and they'll learn everything really
rapidly because they have no
preconceived notions that this thing is
going to be boring in some way or other
it's possibly the case that everything
is inherently interesting if you try
hard enough but there's only so many
hours in a day a child's kind of doesn't
really understand that they're so young
they don't realize that the number of
years ahead of them is limited you don't
have that sense as a child i know i
didn't and so you just tried to learn
everything so that's one thing you don't
know what you're not interested in and
the other thing is as i said hang-ups
you begin to think you can't do that
that's too hard
that's going to bore me
i'm going to be embarrassed and look
foolish if i try and learn that
particular thing these are things that
come to us via school and via other
means social groups and whatever and
this is i think really where the
stunting of the growth and rapidity of
learning really comes in people become
shy in social groups and especially in
learning groups you know we have to
admit that there are lots of people who
don't have these level of hang-ups and
you'd have to talk to them a lot of it's
inexplicit knowledge you know feynman
famously taught himself all sorts of
things you know
lock picking and you know how to play
the bongo drums and the languages and
the deciphered hieroglyphics all this
sort of stuff feynman did because he
never lost that childlike willingness to
seem foolish he was willing to go out
and to seem foolish i mean if you're
willing to play bongo drums as a famous
physicist you know there's a level there
of
willingness to
not care what anyone else thinks and so
that's what you need but many of us of
course the majority of us care what
other people think to a large extent you
know we're part of a social group
and so
we're worried when we try and learn
things that we're going to come off as
foolish by people who already know how
to do that thing proficiently so i hope
that provides at least some insight some
answer question three from al
anti-realism instrumentalism seem
intuitively nonsensical to me but what's
the best argument against it well
firstly in the case of anti-realism if
someone was genuinely an anti-realist
take them seriously i think is some
advice that i've received from david
deutsch before and so if they
insist on the non-reality of reality
well then you know they're insisting
that perhaps you don't exist because you
are part of reality so there's no point
engaging with them because you can't
possibly persuade them otherwise so take
them seriously in their own terms take
them seriously as an anti-realist
and if they think that reality isn't
real then there's no possible way of
persuading them of the reality of
reality so why waste your breath why
waste time but for the rest of us who
want to make actual progress and to find
solutions in the real world the argument
against anti-realism is to say because
it allows you to make progress with the
assumption that there's a reality out
there that adheres to producing some
regularities over time that which we can
which we can come to understand to some
degree of accuracy and that allows it to
solve our problems it's the
underlying precondition for making
progress now some people might say well
i don't need to believe and i need to
accept that reality exists in order to
make progress fair enough but it's a to
me it's a pointless discussion to engage
in you know that the person who is
insisting that reality really exists and
the person who insists no it's all a
dream or something like that if someone
wants to insist that
uh physical reality doesn't exist and
they're dreaming it all into existence
just take them seriously as for
instrumentalism instrumentalism is
seemingly as i've said on my podcast
many many times it's only an issue for
some quantum physicists
it's not an issue for the geologists
it's not an issue for the ornithologist
or the geographer or the historian or
the political scientist or name anyone
engaged in any activity ever except for
certain very rarefied quantum physicists
they're the only ones who care about
this particular thing instrumentalism is
this claim that the only purpose of a
scientific theory is to make predictions
that's all you don't need to explain the
underlying reality in fact the
underlying reality cannot be explained
now why do they think this because of
bad philosophy why do they have this bad
philosophy because they couldn't
understand what was going on in quantum
theory early on so they gave up on ever
understanding quantum theory they gave
up on explanations and so they said we
can predict the outcome of experiments
but we can't understand why the outcome
of the experiment is that way so let's
just say that that's all we're going to
do very well allow them for the rest of
us who want to make progress in
understanding reality which is the first
and primary reason i think for doing
science in the first place because we
want to understand this
majestic reality in which we find
ourselves we want to come to a deeper
understanding of reality we want to be
able to explain it
that instrumentalism is not a route to
that it's not a route to that more
spiritual side of science in coming to
appreciate the beauty of
what we the complexity around us and
prediction is only a small part of this
exercise of this entire project anyway
so the best argument against
instrumentalism is
we want to understand reality and for
anyone who wants to understand reality
there is a complete and utter poverty in
instrumentalism instrumentalism is not
going to allow you to understand
anything all it's going to do is to
allow you to predict the outcome of a
particular experiment but outside of
quantum theory who cares about that
but you know even a a committed
instrumentalist has
some explanations that they're willing
to take on board it's just that they
partition off a certain part of the
scientific enterprise from explanation
in other words they will have an
explanation for how the apparatus works
you know so you look at the twin slit
apparatus they will say well what the
twin slits do is they block light
everywhere except for the two slits in
that area and they'll have an
explanation for how the light source
works how it produces photons by
increasing temperature or whatever so i
have explanations for just about
everything except for the outcome of
that particular experiment so everywhere
the instrumentalists the committed
so-called instrumentalists will have
explanations in their personal life for
every other area of science for history
for
anything at all you ask them about
except for specific experiments in
quantum theory so an instrumentalist is
never really an instrumentalist they're
just an instrumentalist about a
particular thing that they're too
afraid one might say of being committed
to realism about because
in the case of quantum theory which is
the only time this comes up you either
have to go for the realistic explanation
that the universe is stupendously
greater in terms of its
physical constituents than what we can
observe in other words there exists a
multiverse
either you go for that which sounds a
little bit crazy
but it is considerably less crazy than
saying there is no explanation or
consciousness has some effect on
physical reality something like that
via the quantum realm
so hopefully that helps okay so
i am up to question four and my rate of
answering leaves something to be desired
unless we persevere from phil
brett as a long-time patron of your
wonderful podcast i have a question that
perhaps you can shed some light on
thanks for the opportunity page 217 of
the fabric of reality contains david's
famous challenge to those who still
cling to the single universe view
explain how shaw's algorithm works
when shaw's algorithm has factorised a
number containing 10 to the power of 500
or so times the computational resources
that can be seen to be present where was
the number factorised my questions are
simply one is david referring to
bennett's minimum energy of computation
when he talks about the computational
resources that are seen to be present
and two
such a capability in a quantum computer
would be a clear demonstration of
quantum supremacy which may be nascent
how would the single universe hypothesis
explain it
and i also asked my patreons just
recently if they had any further
questions to get back to me and so
phil's written a follow-up
he says since you asked here is an
elaboration to my question does david's
specific challenge in the fabric of
reality to explain what we today call a
demonstration of quantum supremacy using
shaw's algorithm without invoking the
multiverse rely on bennett's minimum
energy of computation
if
not what then and has david weighed in
on whether any of the current crop of
quantum computers are poised to
demonstrate quantum supremacy in this
way the last one first i don't know i
don't know if david has weighed in
um on whether any of the current crop of
quantum computers are poised to
demonstrate it i don't think we know i
don't think anyone knows to be honest
with you i have
limited understanding of the state of
quantum computation right now i have
some
limited knowledge of a specific kind of
quantum computer that is being developed
at the university of new south wales i'm
you know not involved in it in any way i
just happen to have been out there i've
read about it more than any of the other
kinds of quantum computers that are out
there
and all i can say about it is they're
making progress but it is
limited at the moment okay and
you know for a whole bunch of
engineering reasons it's extremely
difficult to
stop these
qubits from decoy hearing from the
information from the outside leaking
into the computer and so there are
significant engineering challenges for
that particular kind i don't see
that the other models that i've hitherto
heard of are demonstrating anything like
becoming quantum supremacy is supposed
to be this idea that one day there'll be
quantum computers
that fireact exceed
the capacity of any classical computer
to do particular tasks what we're really
after of course is a universal quantum
computer the quantum computer that can
do everything that david's original
theory said that it will be able to do
namely everything that a classical
computer can do and more much faster of
course hasten to add that the repertoire
of computations
the different kinds of computations that
a normal classical desktop computer can
in principle perform
is identical to that of a quantum
computer a quantum computer can't do
more different computations it can just
do some of them
magnificently much faster because as
david says it's a different mode of
computation it's a different way of
computing things using the resources in
these other universes now as to phil's
first question is david referring to
benjamin's
bennett's minimum energy of computation
when he talks about the computational
resources
it can be that or it can be as we like
to often put this
simply if you turned all of the visible
universe the matter in the visible
universe into a computer so that you had
you know as much memory as the physical
universe can hold
and the switching speeds of the
transistors in that classical computer
were operating at the speed of light
you know
and if you tried to do something like
factorize a a stupendously large
number using that computer
that computer would take even operating
at the very physical limits of what's
available in the universe namely
the speed of light namely all of the
matter in the universe turned into a
computer then you would find that the
amount of matter there and the speed at
which it's operating would be
insufficient to do the computation in an
efficient time in other words
think in the order of well the upper
limit well there is no upper limit you
just make the number as big as you like
and the that particular computer might
take hundreds of billions or trillions
of years
a feet which a sufficiently large
quantum computer would do in an
efficient amount of time maybe it would
take seconds or minutes or something
like that
and so that's my understanding of what
we mean by computational resources
the second question
such a capability in a quantum computer
would be a clear demonstration of
quantum supremacy which may be nice how
would the single universe hypothesis
explain it well that's the that's the
whole question it wouldn't be i don't
know but i would would guess that it
can't it
given what we understand of the laws of
physics and how classical computation
works
the idea that there are not other
universes there for is refuted it's a
refutation of the single universe
hypothesis the single universe people
have all the explaining left ahead of
them if we when rather when we have
a computer a proper functioning
universal quantum computer able to do
things that no classical computer even a
classical computer that consists of all
the matter in the universe operating at
the speed of light could do some
questions from ian now hi brett
firstly let's go through them one at a
time
one what is the delineation between
reason and unreason in their first
conversation on sam harris podcast
number 22 surviving the con cosmos at
about 7 minutes 40 and again at 10
minutes
and 10 seconds david talks about the
demarcation between reason for which he
says science and philosophy are
manifestations
and unreason when dealing with different
kinds of ideas however the conversation
never quite grants the david the
opportunity to elaborate on this
distinction do you have any thoughts on
this and where you think david might
have gone i don't know where david might
have gone my understanding of this
distinction between reason and unreason
comes down to error correction and so
science is a great error correcting
device for our misconceptions about
physical reality and philosophy
it's likewise a way of correcting our
errors in all domains
you know the the meta science view so to
speak uh the meta mathematical view
ethics politics history so on and so
forth so uh all of our interesting
intellectual and academic pursuits are
ideally about correcting errors we have
existing ideas and the way in which we
improve those ideas is by creatively
coming up with new conjectures about
those ideas and then criticizing them
finding errors in the new ideas finding
errors in the old ideas identifying and
correcting those errors and when we do
that well we say we're using reason when
we hold back from doing that when we
fall into
dogma when we fall into tribal beliefs
we fall into a way in which we are
protecting
our protecting ideas from criticism and
if we're protecting our ideas from
criticism we're eliminating the
possibility
to a large extent
of correcting errors in those ideas and
that's when we have unreason we say
someone is being unreasonable when they
are simply committed dogmatically to a
particular idea they're not looking for
the errors they're not trying to
identify the errors and if they're not
trying to identify the errors then
they're certainly not going to be able
to correct the errors and so that's what
i would say the distinction between
reason and unreason is reason is where
you are committed to identifying
correcting identifying and correcting
errors and unreason is where you're not
for whatever reason that might be two
what is a fact ah okay um i've never
really considered what my definition
might be but i would say it's something
like
a fact is a theory about an observation
but it need not be that of course um
that's being too clever by half a fact
would be an elemental part of a theory
but it would still be theoretical facts
are of course in popularian epistemology
still interpretations of reality in some
way or other if i say something like
an electron a an electron has a negative
charge
that's a fact that's a fact about the
electron which is just which is just to
say it's our best current understanding
of an aspect of the physics of an
electron
two electrons will repel one another
that's a fact as well but it's not
really explanatory is it if we go into
the details about why
two electrons repel one other we say
well they both have the same electric
charge and we say why do they both have
the same electric charge why should two
particles of the same electric charge
repel one another then we need to call
on the deeper theoretical apparatus but
the facts are an element of
that theory which
likely require which tends to require
further explanation okay there's no such
thing as a
naked fact without interpretation
explanation theory behind it question
three is a person a beginning of
infinity in microcosm in terms of
potential limited only by memory and
speed time health and short circuiting
by static means if so what are the
implications of this
i would say absolutely yes yes the most
important beginning of infinity most
likely i would say that here the two we
are aware of would be the existence of
people who are definitely a beginning of
infinity any single person is a
beginning of infinity of knowledge
creation potentially as you say limited
only by memory and speed and time yes
and health and all of that stuff perfect
yes um
what are the implications of this well a
person is a special kind of beginning
infinity because it's the beginning of
infinity in all different directions a
beginning of
infinite construction of physical
reality and molding of physical reality
in light of the beginning of infinite
understanding of that physical reality
the beginning of infinite creation of
knowledge within the reality in which i
find we find ourselves the beginning of
the infinity of wealth creation so a
person and civilization more broadly is
a beginning of
infinite outreach of people from this
place where we find ourselves to the
rest of the universe and the rest of
physical reality so yes we are the key
beginning of infinity i would suggest
amongst the entire spectrum of
beginnings of infinity that are listed
at the end of each chapter in the
beginning of infinity the book
the the important implication is that we
need to value people far more highly and
value life far more highly than we tend
to do because if we go extinct then as
far as we know
that's it we are as far as we can tell
the only creatures in the universe that
are capable of continuing this
open-ended stream of knowledge creation
and therefore the
moulding as i say the construction of
physical reality around us to make the
place friendly for us to make the entire
universe ultimately friendly for us so
we can exploit the resources across the
entire universe and not be confined to a
thin film on the surface of this one
planet in this one solar system of this
one galaxy out of
hundreds of potentially trillions of
galaxies out there in the universe if
not the vis the visible universe
four
did you have any thoughts on the inborn
knowledge of people could there be some
startup script for people encoded in
genes which sets in train the process of
knowledge creation substantiated in
ideas i guess if we knew how genetic
knowledge could create knowledges in
ideas we could create ai curious about
the interface between encodings in the
podcast mentioned with sam harris
when discussing the universality of
computation and the constraints of
memory and speed but also the lack of
the right knowledge for example the
knowledge
for learning languages and explanations
david hypothesizes that the brain of a
chimpanzee might be able to contain this
knowledge however there's no way to
implant this knowledge in the form of
ideas short of nanosurgery
um
do you have any thoughts on the inborn
knowledge of people yes we we are not
blank slates i've been at pains to say
this i think this this idea of blank
slate ism so to speak that were born
with no ideas whatsoever it's a
philosophical curiosity i don't know
that many people these days take it very
seriously
we seem to have an understanding you
know there's something that the
evolutionary psychologists kind of get
right
that we are born with ideas and those
ideas seem to affect us throughout the
rest of our lives
there's no one on our side of the ledger
i think in the popularian popurian
community that follows the work of david
deutsch that would dispute that but
there's been some claims over time that
we do dispute this idea that we're born
with certain ideas and these ideas can
have effects over time we agree with
that the difference is between that
stance which we all agree on
and the stance that says you can't
therefore change your mind about these
ideas that you're born with that these
ideas determine
necessarily your behavior in some way or
other that you're born thinking a
certain thing
and therefore you can't change your mind
about it that's completely false that's
completely false in all sorts of trivial
ways
david likes to make the case about well
and i followed his line of reasoning on
this you know if there's anything that
you're born with if there's any idea
that comes to you via your dna via your
genetics that is implanted in your brain
it is the desire to survive it is
survival instinct so to speak
that that idea you're born with and that
directs your life and in some sense
people might say it is
determining the fact that you keep on
eating you keep on looking after
yourself you have an instinct to survive
right
but
people routinely
override that survival instinct they
commit suicide okay uh in the sad case
in the the the evil case they you know
suicide bombings are a thing so
although
there are ideas that we might be born
with that's not to say we can't change
our mind about them there are there you
know we're we're born with apparently
the instinct to eat but people become
anorexic people go on diets it doesn't
matter what the idea is that you're born
with you're not determined to
necessarily slavishly follow that idea
like an animal is or like a computer
programmed or a robot program to do a
certain thing is we are not so
programmed we have a creative algorithm
running in some way shape or form on our
minds which enables us even when we have
an idea that comes to us perhaps by our
genetics perhaps
we're able to reflect on that idea
criticize that idea and in fact reject
that idea no matter how strong that idea
is sometimes it's hard we admit that
sometimes it's hard people are
born with so we're told by
the nutritionists and so on a a strong
desire to consume sugar and fats because
you know we we evolved in the savannah
and so our body craves these particular
things apparently so we're told
but people routinely are able to give up
sugar and fat
and so what do you say about those
people what do you say about these super
fit people of the world who give up
sugar entirely
and who who run marathons who are
extremely fit and all that kind of thing
were they born without that desire no
they got over it
okay so so
the mind is more powerful than the body
by demonstration of some people now some
people have less determination less
discipline less
ability to find fun and enjoyment in
actually overcoming the desire for
things like
sugar drugs alcohol fatty foods
unhealthy lifestyles and so on and so
forth
we here
in our world view think that that's
always possible it doesn't matter what
the issue happens to be sometimes it's
extremely hard sometimes it's so hard
and i think if you go to the do explain
podcast and you listen to michael
golding the
psychiatrist who is schooled in
the world view of david deutsch to a
large extent he has this vision as many
of us do that
yes
sometimes there are aspects of the mind
which are very difficult for people to
overcome the negative aspects of some
people suffer from depression some
people suffer from
what might be called mental illnesses i
have a bit of an issue with calling it a
mental illness but certainly hang-ups
problems
emotional disturbances so on and so
forth that are very difficult to think
their way out of and so they might for a
time need something like medication to
help dampen down some particular ideas
some sensations some emotions and so on
and so forth i have no problem with that
whatsoever but in in practice although
it might be hard in practice
many times
mere talk therapy might not enable a
person to get over
certain thoughts they have that they
might have been born with indeed in
principle it must be possible in
practice we don't always know how is
what i like to say um as for the
chimpanzee and i think there's actually
a question
there that you asked so i'll i'll pass
over that in silence question five what
do you think about monopolies and
markets i think they can only possibly
exist in a situation where the
government gets involved otherwise they
don't exist they're chimeras
people talk now about things like google
being a monopoly and so perhaps the
government should get involved and
regulate google or something like that i
think that's completely and utterly
false
even if a particular
provider of a service or good
has
the majority of the market or even all
of the market let's presume that's not
the case we have things like bing but
let's presume google did control all
searches
there's nothing that can stop another
company from coming along and creating a
search engine nothing at all
this is the history of what's been going
on by the way of course on the internet
anyone who's been watching these things
relatively closely is that things do get
overturned things that we think are
there forever and a day
tend to just go by the wayside if google
has a majority of the search engine
market because it's providing a good
service that people want
and although a whole bunch of people
might complain
about the fact that google is curating
its searches in such a way that might be
politically biased if that political
bias got so bad as to be something that
people simply couldn't tolerate then
those people who can't tolerate that
should move to being or start their own
search engine this happens all the time
what's that the famous case of um
something
it wasn't exactly monopolies right but
but
microsoft had microsoft explorer
shipping freely with its versions of
windows and people complained and the
government got upset that they were
giving away freely giving away software
freely giving away microsoft explorer
because that apparently was going to
lead to a monopoly in the kind of web
browser that people were using how many
people use microsoft explorer now but
this led to all of these issues with the
us government getting involved in the
business of microsoft breaking up the
company telling them that they couldn't
have the
web browser shipped with the operating
system a ridiculous requirement of the
us government in retrospect because no
one now uses microsoft explorer at all
anyway and besides now what happens when
i buy an apple product which i do have i
have safari shipped with it effectively
free just comes along for the ride but i
don't have to use safari i can use
chrome i can use firefox i can use other
web browsers as well there is no
monopoly in the market except where the
government gets involved which i think
is terrible in the natural state of
capitalism if we had actual capitalism
there would be no monopolies there might
be places where a particular company has
a hundred percent of the market but that
doesn't mean it's a monopoly in the
sense that most people think every time
a new invention comes out a new creation
by necessity that's a monopoly i'm not
sure but for argument's sake you know
here's my um here's my apple watch you
um
i think apple were the first to bring
out a smart watch weren't they now if
they were i can't remember the history
of this but let's say that they were
does that mean that at the moment at
which these the first lot of these apple
watches roll off the production line
that apple therefore has a monopoly on
smart watches
in a sense they do they're the only ones
selling them because they're the first
ones to have invented created marketed
and sold the apple watch but what
happens well samsung quickly emulate
what apple are doing garmin quickly
emulate what apple are doing all these
other watch companies start emulating
what apple are doing and providing a
similar service
cheaper in some cases maybe preferable
in some cases for other people the rest
of us just like apple products and so we
stick with apple
but this is what goes on i mean
people who aren't involved in business
like the government shouldn't be
inserting themselves into
businesses where they don't really
understand what's going on in the first
place especially in tech tech's the
greatest example of this how many
politicians understand tech very very
few and yet they all have opinions on it
they all have opinions on how the
various businesses should run and so
they insert themselves in it and of
necessity because they don't have the
specific knowledge required they ruin
things they absolutely ruin things when
they stick their beak into things that
they shouldn't get involved in the
places where there are genuine
monopolies are places in communist
countries look at
north korea north korea absolutely has a
monopoly on
domestic air travel in north korea
there's no competition there in fact for
any product or service that you have in
north korea essentially the government
has a monopoly on that and we know it's
a monopoly because if you try
to introduce competition in the market
you'll be arrested thrown in jail
whatever okay who knows
and so
that's what we should mean by monopoly
monopoly should mean something where if
you try to provide competition in the
market for that particular service even
where hitherto there's only been one
provider of that surface if someone
comes along and decides to use force
against you to say you cannot enter the
market that's a monopoly that's what a
monopolism monopoly requires force in
order to maintain it and as big as some
of these companies are they're not
monopolies because they can't use force
at least they shouldn't be able to use
force to keep others out of the market
and it shouldn't be any business of the
rest of us to a large extent if there is
one provider of a particular service
because if there is one particular
provider of a particular service then
that means they must be doing the best
job of providing that particular service
and if you don't like it then you should
start your own business to compete with
them and if you don't want to do that if
you think it's too hard well
stop complaining stop complaining just
accept the fact that
someone is out there working really hard
to provide this service which you
yourself are already saying is too hard
for you to do look the last thing i'll
say on that is markets have niches
within them and the niches are filled
by people doing things they're
interested in and sometimes just no one
else is interested in doing that
particular thing do i have a monopoly on
producing podcasts devoted exclusively
to the beginning of infinity and the
fabric of reality to some extent i don't
know that many other people are out
there doing precisely this i've found a
particular niche
but if someone else comes along and
decides to do this great in fact i would
like it because it means all boats rise
with the same tide we would have more
people talking about specifically these
ideas that i think should be talked
about
far more it would only be an actual
monopoly if someone decided to start up
a youtube channel and then i started
sending them threats through the mail
and saying you can't do that i've
cornered the marketer if i um you know
went to the government and said um i
want to copyright the ability to
do this kind of thing and anyone else in
australia for example who tries to start
up a channel devoted to the work of
david deutsch should be fined or thrown
in jail then that would be a monopoly
certainly within this country anyway but
the government wouldn't do that and the
government should not do that kind of
thing
except that it does in some particular
cases for example postal services i hear
are sometimes kind of like this the
government runs the postal service and
no one else is quite able to do to
deliver letters and so
you end up with rather poor service in
many of these places okay that's enough
on monopolies so six is it the role of
the state for example with taxation to
realize the ethics of moral progress of
a society
no i would say
as a first approximation to the answer i
wouldn't look to
parts of the state
for
moral progress i presume we mean by
politicians passing legislation perhaps
bureaucrats in some way shape or form in
institutions
making rules about particular
uses of taxation i wonder really we need
to have an example of what ian might
mean here by for example with taxation
does it mean something like welfare um
so
i would say no um that
if our ethics is that we don't want poor
people starving on the corner of
your local street
is it the role of the government to come
along to give them food well at the
moment it seems uncontroversial to say
according to most people
as far as i'm aware that the government
has a role in providing the
homeless person the unemployed person
with a sufficient amount of income
certainly in my country anyway
in order that they can survive or that
they can live my personal opinion by the
way in australia that's the federal
government's role okay so
the federal government's in charge of
effectively in charge of the the entire
nation also is in charge of welfare to a
large extent so if you're unemployed you
go to the federal government in order to
get a handout of cash
every fortnight in order to sustain you
i would prefer that if it's if it was
done locally of course at best by a
local authority
but ideally i would say it's best done
by charity it's best done by people who
personally know the person in need of
assistance and these days there actually
aren't that many people in need of that
kind of assistance but is that what we
mean by moral progress i would think
something like that so moral progress
would be so that everyone is
more
equal
in some way shape or form
even then of course i have difficulties
with this whole conception of equality
but certainly moral progress would be
fewer people below what might be
regarded as a poverty line
in australia i think like america
there's no one that's starving
no one has so little that they can't
feed themselves and that charities are
sufficient
in terms of providing food for people
and in australia not only are the
charities providing food for people but
the government is providing money and
housing and that kind of thing for
people as well
and the government the the government
causes more harm than good often so when
you have this uh
blanket means by which you're addressing
problems of the individual
by
just having a single rule for everyone
everyone gets the same amount of money
for example
then of course you're not treating any
individual like the individual they
deserve to be treated as someone in the
local community who is in need of
assistance should be helped in that
local community anyway i'd need a
specific example of what
this question
might mean
but in general no i don't look to the
state i don't think it's the role of the
state
to realize the ethics of moral progress
in a society i think the state follows
people
tend to
make certain
progress and then the state follows
along but we need a specific example
these days i think historically in
places in various places you know
certain people haven't had the vote for
example and then of course
um
well it's the role of the populace to
vote for
uh the capacity of everyone to have the
vote really it should be there to begin
with in some way shape or form so it's
the the the citizenry that that really
makes moral progress it's the the
philosophers the intellectuals um the
average person who who agrees on what
moral progress amounts to and then the
state eventually catches up moving on to
neil now
hi brett hope all is well with you it is
i'm delighted that you're still finding
great ways to get david's and popper's
ideas out there in such an accessible
way and you've connected to folk like
naval and his network with regard to
your ama episode my questions would be
can you please summarise the open
questions that you think david's work
points us to as you see things context
is that i've had a vague but unfulfilled
intention of trying to at least list
such open questions for instance our
lack of a theory of conjecture
creativity as per his ion
agi or the lack of aj article his
thoughts on qualia and
not sure whether linked to the qualia
point but the difference between a
universal turing machine simulation
of for example a volcanic explosion and
the real thing
my reason for asking this question is
that one of your listeners may be
inspired to solve some or all of the
open problems
good questions there neil um well look
the open questions that david's work
points us to uh in all directions
you've outlined some there but where
where do we really begin i mean
how exactly we construct explanations
which is such a central part of david's
philosophy in the first place is an open
question linked to this idea of agi we
don't know what agi is it's an open
question how can we help eliminate
anti-rational means because the more
that we can do that more we can identify
anti-rational means
and eliminate them from the
cultural zeitgeist the faster progress
can occur what is qualia okay these
things are all tied up the difference
between a universal turing we've seen
simulation of a volcanic explosion a
real thing well that's an easy one i
mean because a volcanic explosion is
purely a physical thing it's not an
abstract thing and so
um
the difference is one consists entirely
of the matter that is spewing out of the
volcano and the volcano itself it's all
made of matter and the simulation
consists of no matter but rather it's an
abstract thing that can be instantiated
in any of a number of different physical
substrates unlike the volcano which is
just one physical it is the physical
substrate that's what it is it is
nothing but the physics right there's no
abstract aspect to a volcanic eruption
but the simulation is well essentially
all abstract the other open questions i
suppose are things like you know
solving aging i know it's only
orthogonally related to what david talks
about but we can be immortal it's an
important problem to try and solve that
this question of why it is that
people decay and eventually come to the
end of their life
that's just a series of
open questions each of which if only we
could solve them would enable us to be
immortal how can we make
more rapid progress how can we deal with
the problems of tomorrow without
becoming fixated on the problems of
today i think that's a real problem for
civilization right now that we identify
particular problems we become
fixated on them politically and
therefore fail to create sufficient
wealth now for what we might discover
tomorrow is the really pressing problem
i think in particular we've seen that
with climate change and with covert yes
both important problems that we should
deal with but we seem to be throwing all
of our wealth eggs into the one basket
to a large extent and
focusing a lot of our knowledge creation
and
attention on those particular things
causing global anxiety about those
things meanwhile who knows what's around
the corner who knows as i like to say
bubbling beneath the deep blue sea or
about to come from the dark black sky
we don't know and are we ready for the
unknown we could be more ready for the
unknown by having more and more wealth
but at the moment there seems to be a
great thrust of people politically
pushing for less wealth less rapid
wealth creation from a in a whole bunch
of ways and less freedom in a whole
bunch of directions as well the two
things wealth and freedom that we need
in order to prepare
for an unknown tomorrow so being fixated
so how do we stop being fixated how
politically and civilizationally how do
we stop being fixated on
known the known problems and become
more concerned about the unknown because
if we're concerned about the unknown
then well not not anxious about the
unknown but just concerned about what
tomorrow might bring such that we focus
on creating wealth and rapid progress
today
rather than slowing down progress
because we think that might be a
solution to a particular known problem
namely something like climate change
that
we're concerned about the constituents
of the atmosphere which might cause
local changes to coastal cities and so
on and so forth okay and uh weather
events that we might be concerned about
that's a very parochial concern
we need to be concerned about what's
going to happen in a hundred years and a
thousand years not to do with climate
change but everything else that might
potentially happen cosmologically out
there we need to be ready for that we
need to be robust and far more
technologically powerful than what we
are today to deal with um the unknown so
i haven't really answered that that
there but um yeah so this is this is uh
a part of the open questions the open
questions are
the fact that we need to be prepared for
more and more open questions that we
don't even have a conception of and so i
think that
that's what i'm concerned about at the
moment anyway people's attitude to the
future their negative attitude to the
future being fixated on particular
problems when they should be very
concerned about the unknown from thomas
thomas schuler hi brad i hope you are
doing good cool idea with the ama one
question from my side could you please
elaborate your view on the simulation
argument i think deutsch mentions it
somewhere as missing the point if i
remember quickly correctly
i interpreted this statement as if it
kicks back sufficiently the substrate
doesn't matter and what remains is more
of a spiritual nature i appreciate the
argument as an example for
the theology which i can remain agnostic
about compared to standard issue
theologies which disagree with the facts
of our reality especially in terms of
the concept of a benevolent god i'll be
interested in hearing your take on the
argument have a good day and thanks for
your insights thanks thomas yes i agree
with you
that
this
brings up
ideas of
theology
god
the supernatural lully tanner has called
it supernaturalism i think she might
have got it from elsewhere but um
this is the idea that
once people become
atheists they reject
traditional religion so they reject god
they reject magic supernatural stuff
there is a species of people especially
public intellectual who then go on to
embrace
something
equally mystical to a large extent and
something like the simulation argument
is kind of like that of course it's
couched in
this language of computers and
technology and physics but it's not
really it's not really about physics
it's not really about technology because
the claim is that our universe is
simulated within some other universe
which might very well obey completely
well would obey different laws of
physics that we're a running on a
computer which instantiates particular
laws of physics so who knows what the
laws of physics are like in the universe
where the computer
on which our simulation is running is
like i don't know this comes from nick
bostrom right let's just go through the
simulation argument
the simulation argument says that some
point at some point in the distant
future
we will have the capacity
as a species
to
simulate entire universes within a
computer okay maybe a quantum computer
of the future and if we do so then
inside of that computer at some point
especially if that computer is running a
simulation that is you know operating at
processing speech much much faster so
the time is evolving much much faster
inside of the simulation that inside
that simulation will be produced
life which eventually evolves into
intelligent creatures
who will then invent computers on which
they will simulate
universes
which themselves contain intelligent
people who are able to simulate
universes within which you find
intelligent people able to simulate
universe and so on you have this
fractal you know exponential increase of
the number of simulated universes and so
by this argument we find ourselves in a
universe and by the simulation argument
shouldn't we expect as a matter of
probability or something like that that
we are in a simulated universe no
this is exactly equivalent it's exactly
equivalent to and i i've never found why
people are enamored by that particular
thought experiment
over something like
well you're dreaming right now
or you're living in the matrix
you know in other words solipsism is
real in some way you're the only thing
that exists everything else is a dream
none of these can be falsified i don't
think any of them are particularly
interesting and all of them
postulate the existence of an entity
that we do not have access to okay in
other words a reality beyond
uh what we have access to via the
methods of science so there's no point
worrying because we can never possibly
gain access to this thing
you might very well wake up out of your
dream in which case all of reality as
you've hitherto known it vanishes and
you wake up out of your dream into the
new reality okay if indeed you're
dreaming we can't rule that out
it's not a good explanation because it's
infinitely variable with you know you're
a figment of someone else's imagination
you don't really exist and when they
wake up you'll disappear as well
or that
two people are dreaming this thing
simultaneously a simulation argument is
just like this you know that all of
reality might disappear if um
you know the simulation is turned off at
some point
but it's it's it's no different to me
than you know
belief in god taking this seriously
god is this
thing that we can
barely comprehend we might
postulate the existence of god but god
is
omniscient knows everything has a mind
if mind is the right word to use that is
beyond our comprehension very well
there's not much point arguing about a
thing
that we can't begin to comprehend beyond
knowing that it exists so too for the
simulation the simulation just takes the
place of god because as soon as you try
to postulate what's going on outside of
the simulation you're in a realm beyond
what our experimental physics inside of
the simulation could tell us because any
experiment we do inside of this
simulation
is only going to reveal
more and more about the reality of the
simulation
not the computer on which the simulation
is running and not the universe in which
the computer on which the simulation is
running uh what the physics of that
universe is like
let alone if that universe itself is
being simulated on another computer and
so on add infinitum it's just one of
those things that i i presume people
sitting around campfires drinking beers
get into
talking about it's um to me
now having talked about the varieties of
these different supernatural
explanations uh none of them are
particularly interesting because they
all collapse into the same thing of
you
can't understand
things beyond the signal but i might
just say i think paul davies
might have mentioned this in in the
goldilocks enigma something like that
one of his books anyway talking about
how if indeed we are simulated then then
this is a simulation then there will be
a limit um if you continue to probe
using particle accelerators
what the smallest particle will be
you'll get to the smallest possible
particle you get to the the bit of
information that is being simulated but
if it's not a simulation
then there's no reason to think that we
need to stop somewhere it will just be a
beginning of infinity as
we think physical reality is we can only
proceed on the assumption
that we're not in a simulation
it doesn't make a difference either way
so my take on the argument is um
it's a clever
argument but ultimately
uninteresting it doesn't help us make
progress or solve any problems
whatsoever from daniel anderson hi brett
i love the response videos you do one
about your val harari could be fun um
yes so um hirari i don't know much about
yuval harari i know he's a historian
i did read his book his book sitting on
my kindle um
oh what's it called um
[Music]
sapiens yeah so brief history of
humankind what i can remember is um like
with many of these
books that take a a long view of history
they miss what david deutsch
has contributed in terms of
meme theory this idea that what makes
the difference between
the non-progress
and rapid progress
is the existence of a tradition of
criticism
that
it
the things that are usually pointed to
like for example farming and agriculture
that that caused
progress and a proliferation of people
that certain
institutions political institutions for
example might have made a difference to
rapid progress and so on and so forth
and these are the antecedents that
explain how we find ourselves where we
find ourselves now are all aspects of
without ever right getting right to the
nub of it
aspects of this tradition of criticism
which really is the underlying
fundamental difference between
ancient
tribes and even ancient civilizations
and our modern enlightenment
civilization the difference between slow
progress and static societies and fast
progress and dynamic societies okay last
question from my patreon so this is
episode
101 i'm going to have to go on to 102. i
knew i'd talk for too long i knew that
um
[Laughter]
that given the opportunity to just wax
lyrical about
questions off the top of my head that i
would tend to be very verbose and so
here we are
well over an hour now of answering
questions one to go from patreon
feel free to join my patreon just search
for me brett hall or search for topcast
patreon on google
follow the links and um feel free to
contribute and ask me questions i am i'm
happy to answer people's questions via
whatsapp and various other things as
well depending upon how popular topcast
gets but
get in early and um yeah i'm happy to
converse with people uh via email and so
on and so forth if you're a patreon
so once i get through this last question
we'll go to episode 102 where i'll
answer the questions that were given to
me on twitter and various other forums
as well i might have to do those a
little bit more quickly so the last one
of my patreon to ask questions is from
joe iman
hi brett
re
ama questions do you have thoughts on
the way the beginning of infinity has
increased in popularity in recent years
did the book anticipate and explain its
own trajectory in a way
it is a resilient and useful book that
contains resilient and useful
explanations about resilient and useful
information knowledge is the book
destined to become increasingly popular
did david know this when writing it
that's a great question insightful i
should say now i'll record this answer
and then i'll have to um
quickly
fire off a message to david to ask
whether or not i can say this but i have
had
this conversation with david because
i've talked to him about the fact that
it's so hard to get a copy
of the beginning of infinity right now
and one of the issues is among other
things at the moment apparently there's
a paper shortage
so we we've learned and so the the
publishers at the beginning of infinity
are unable to
physically publish hard and soft copies
of the book so you have to get it on
kindle or audio book for now but also
the the publishers apparently continue
to be surprised that it sells out and
david has had to say to them you know
it's not that kind of book where it just
sells a few copies and then it ceases to
sell copies so he knew he had
the idea already
in his mind as far as i know and talking
to david about this that
he expected it to continue to sell
year-on-year decade on decade do i have
thoughts on the way the beginning of
india has increased and populated in
recent years yes it's expected
as expected by us hoped for by
by many of us who read the book early on
it's it's a difficult read yes
as some people have said now i say it's
a difficult read because i keep hearing
that
i didn't think it was i'm not being
arrogant i didn't think it was a a
hugely difficult read i i because i just
enjoyed it i was just so excited to get
into it but in retrospect when i think
back yes there were there were parts of
the book where i had to reread
i had to read it multiple times in order
to try and
grok what was being said now the
question there also says did the book
anticipate and explain its own
trajectory um
i don't know i don't recall a passage
where it sort of um reflects on itself
as such but
necessarily the ideas that it talks
about are
the way in which the only way in which
we can continue to survive off into an
infinite future and as far as i know
it's
reasonably unique
in that respect certainly there's been
no other book that has had all of these
aspects about how civilization can
survive and have an optimistic view of
how civilization can survive and why the
survival of civilization ultimately
depends upon knowledge creation solving
problems and that comes down to the
existence of people people being central
to this whole project and people being
the most crucial thing in the universe
for the survival of
ourselves absolutely as the most
important thing in the universe but also
anything else we might value including
animals and the planet itself if that's
what you're really concerned about it's
only us and our ability to create
knowledge
off into the infinite future that at all
suggests that that might be possible for
us to survive the planet to survive the
animals and the environment that you
care about to survive and that requires
resources and energy and wealth and all
of that stuff so it talks about that so
therefore it talks in a sense about
itself being a catalyst of a sort
now at the beginning infinity had never
been published would it eventually have
been published well
it would need to be
someone would need to lay down those
ideas
for society to actually survive off into
the infinite future you know when you
look at even optimistic science fiction
like
certain series of star trek let's say
that that picture people off into the
distant future
it's just assumed that we somehow get
there
via
increased technology
but really you know technology is just a
facet of
knowledge okay it's one instantiation of
knowledge what you of course need is
robust traditions institutions
ways in which to come to
consensus about what to do in order to
make decisions
there has to be moral progress of course
that's to be progress in all areas there
has to be a focus on wealth creation as
well okay so and technology is a an
absolutely crucial important part of
that but
the central thing is ideas and it's the
ideas in the beginning of infinity that
explain what is required explain what is
required in
in many chapters in fine detail and also
in broad brush about everything that i
just um said
so did it anticipate and explain its own
trajectory
maybe yeah maybe to to some extent it it
sort of implies that these ideas are
necessary and so therefore the beginning
of infinity at least
the ideas in the beginning of affinity
are necessary
so it has to be the case that beginning
of infinity the ideas in the beginning
of infinity
only continue to increase in popularity
because if they don't
we're in a mess we're in dire trouble if
we don't have this optimistic
appreciation of people if we don't have
this optimistic appreciation of
knowledge creation of wealth
then we will go the way of the dinosaur
okay so this is why this book is so
crucially important other people need to
come along as well promote these ideas
write books produce podcasts
put these ideas out there in some way
shape or form in various different ways
and shapes and forms the beginning
infinity was
one of the first
perhaps the most prominent one that
provides this optimistic
view of the way in which we can overcome
our problems because the problems are
inevitable but to know and appreciate
that the problems are of course soluble
they're always
soluble whenever there is a problem if
we direct
our creative capacity towards it and we
have
sufficient wealth
and energy behind us in order to address
the problem then we can
solve the problem we just have to choose
to so
i mean why wouldn't it increase in
popularity over recent years and why
won't it continue to increase in
popularity over the next few years
because people have an absolute hunger
our culture the western culture the
united states europe australia canada
the english-speaking world
parts of asia i would say everyone
humanity civilization planet earth has a
hunger right now for optimism because we
are saturating pessimism we are
absolutely saturated
from
decades of intellectuals
running us down as a species as humanity
as being nothing particularly special
at best
and at worst saying that we are
basically a virus on the surface of the
earth people don't want to hear this
they need they are hungry for something
new people are hungry for a new
view scientifically informed
philosophically robust
informed by the best way of
understanding our place in the universe
as david says a hub of knowledge
creation a hub of problem solving a
place where as we like to say we have
the entire
rest of physical reality here on earth
which is unique
on mars there is not a simulation of the
universe going on there is not this
reflexive way in which
the rest of physical reality is being
modeled anywhere else that we know of
except here on earth so we have this
special relationship to the rest of
physical reality and in particular to
the laws of physics the laws of physics
that govern everything that happens in
the universe are being understood in
increasingly fine detail here and here
alone as far as we know on planet earth
and so that's what the beginning of
infinity tells us that is as far as i
know
even if you read karl popper you read
carl sagan you read
any of the great luminaries of science
communication over the years i don't
think they quite got to that but david
has and so it will only continue to
increase in popularity over the coming
years
which is reason enough for me to
continue to do
this podcast
so i hope you enjoyed that they are my
questions from my patreons next time
questions from twitter if you have any
questions yourself maybe you can you can
ask below in the comments of this video
and maybe in some
distant future
i'll be able to answer those there are
many podcasts on my list
i think i'm i've got a plan for up to
something like episode 100 and
well 120 or something at least so
there's a lot more to come and i have
many ideas for more podcasts as well
so i'm going to be very busy
making more and more podcasts
as i say
subscribe i don't often say that but
subscribe subscribe to this channel
subscribe to the podcast subscribe to
naval's podcast as well someone asked a
question there mentioning the vowel it's
wonderful to have naval on board someone
who appreciates the importance of these
ideas and who is getting on board early
with promoting the positive vision
of what people are able to do and what
wealth generation is able to do and what
resources and the exploitation of
resources is able to do
for ensuring that knowledge creation
continues off into the infinite future
there's no pessimism around naval rava
camp around topcast and around david
deutsch and these ideas so
until next time as i say
bye
[Music]
foreign
two
[Music]
you